= OpenStack Technical Committee charter =

=== Mission ===

The Technical Committee ("TC") is tasked with providing the technical
leadership for OpenStack as a whole (all official programs, as defined below).
It enforces OpenStack ideals (Openness, Transparency, Commonality, Integration,
Quality...), decides on issues affecting multiple programs, forms an ultimate
appeals board for technical decisions, and generally has oversight over all the
OpenStack project.

=== OpenStack Programs ===

OpenStack "Programs" are efforts which are essential to the completion of the
OpenStack project mission, which is ''to produce the ubiquitous Open Source
Cloud Computing platform that will meet the needs of public and private clouds
regardless of size, by being simple to implement and massively scalable''.
Programs can create any code repository and produce any deliverable they deem
necessary to achieve their goals.

Programs are placed under the oversight of the TC, and contributing to one of
their code repositories grants you ATC status (see below). Current efforts or
teams which want to be recognized as a Program should file a motion to the TC.
The TC has ultimate authority over which programs are accepted or declined.

The current, official list of programs can be found [[Programs|here]].

=== Program Leads ===

Program leads ("PTLs") manage day-to-day operations, drive the program goals
and resolve technical disputes within their program. Each program community
should be self-managing by the contributors, and all disputes should be
resolved through active debate and discussion by the community itself. However
if a given debate cannot be clearly resolved, the PTL can decide the outcome.
Although the TC is generally not involved in program-internal decisions, it
still has oversight over program-specific decisions, especially when they
affect other programs or go contrary to general OpenStack project goals.

=== TC Members ===

The TC is composed of 13 directly-elected members. It is partially renewed
using elections every 6 months. All TC members must be OpenStack Foundation
individual members. You can cumulate any other role, including Foundation
Director, with a TC seat.

=== TC Chair ===

After each election, the TC proposes one of its members to act as the TC chair.
In case of multiple candidates, it may use a single-winner election method to
decide the result (see below). The Board of Directors has the authority to
approve the TC chair and shall approve the proposition, unless otherwise
justified by its bylaws. The TC chair is responsible for making sure meetings
are held according to the rules described below, and for communicating the
decisions taken during those meetings to the Board of Directors and the
OpenStack community at large. It may be revoked under the conditions described
in the Foundation bylaws.

=== Meeting ===

TC meetings happen publicly, weekly on IRC. The meeting time should be decided
among TC members after each election. If there isn't consensus on a meeting
time, the option of rotating the time weekly should be explored. The TC
maintains an open agenda on the wiki. A TC meeting is automatically called if
anything is posted to that wiki by one of its members at least one day before
the meeting time. For a meeting to be actually held, at least half of the
members need to be present (rounded up: in a 13-member committee that means a
minimum of 7 people present). Non-members affected by a given discussion are
strongly encouraged to participate to the meeting and voice their opinion,
though only TC members can ultimately cast a vote.

=== Motions ===

Before being put to a vote, motions presented before the TC should be discussed
publicly on the development mailing-list for a minimum of 4 business days to
give a chance to the wider community to express their opinion. TC members can
vote positively, negatively, or abstain. Decisions need more positive votes
than negative votes (ties mean the motion is rejected), and a minimum of
positive votes of at least one third of the total number of TC members (rounded
up: in a 13-member committee that means a minimum of 5 approvers).

=== Proxying ===

When a TC member is unable to make a meeting, they are encouraged to name a proxy
that will represent their opinion and vote on their behalf during the meeting.
Only members really present at the meeting (directly or proxied) can vote.
A TC member may proxy another member, but nobody should ever represent more
than two votes.

=== Election for PTL seats ===

PTL seats are completely renewed every 6 months. A separate election is run for
each program. These elections are collectively held 5 weeks prior to each
design summit, with nominations due 6 weeks prior to the summit and elections
held open for no less than five business days.

=== Voters for PTL seats ("APC") ===

Voters for a given program PTL election are the active program contributors
("APC"), which are a subset of the Foundation Individual Members. Individual
Members who committed a change to a repository of a program over the last two
6-month release cycles are considered APC for that program.

=== Candidates for PTL seats ===

Any APC can propose their candidacy for the corresponding program PTL election.
Sitting PTLs are eligible to run for re-election each cycle, provided they
continue to meet the criteria.

=== Election for TC seats ===

The 13 TC seats are partially renewed every 6 months using staggered elections:
6 seats are renewed every (Northern hemisphere) Fall, and 7 seats are renewed
every Spring. Seats are valid for one-year terms. For this election we'll use a
multiple-winner election system (see below). The election is held 3 weeks prior
to each design summit, with nominations due 4 weeks prior to the summit and
elections held open for no less than five business days.

=== Voters for TC seats ("ATC") ===

The TC seats are elected by the Active Technical Contributors ("ATC"), which
are a subset of the Foundation Individual Members. Individual Members who
committed a change to a repository under ''any'' of the official OpenStack
programs (as defined above) over the last two 6-month release cycles are
automatically considered ATC. Specific contributors who did not have a change
recently accepted in one of the OpenStack programs but nevertheless feel their
contribution to the OpenStack project is technical in nature (bug triagers,
technical documentation writers...) can exceptionally apply for ATC either by
sending an email to the TC chair or by being nominated by an existing ATC via
email to the TC chair. Final approval on the exception is decided by the TC
itself, and is valid one year (two elections).

=== Candidates for TC seats ===

Any Foundation individual member can propose their candidacy for an available,
directly-elected TC seat.

=== Initial committee ===

The current TC will serve as TC until the elections in Fall 2013. At that
point, the two TC members who still had 6 months to serve get a 6-month seat,
and an election is run to determine the 11 other members. Candidates ranking
1st to 6th would get one-year seats, and candidates ranking 7th to 11th would
get 6-month seats. Spring 2014 elections should see the normal renewal of 7
seats.

=== Election systems ===

For single-winner elections, a Condorcet system shall be used.

For multiple-winner elections, a Condorcet or a STV system should be used.

=== Amendment ===

Amendments to this Technical Committee charter shall be proposed in a special
motion, which needs to be approved by the affirmative vote of at least
two-thirds of the total number of TC members (rounded up: in a 13-member
committee that means a minimum of 9 approvers).
