::

  This work is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 3.0
  Unported License.
  http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/3.0/legalcode

.. _`tag-vulnerability:managed`:

=======================
 vulnerability:managed
=======================

This tag is part of the vulnerability-classification system for
vulnerability reporting and tracking across source code
repositories. ``vulnerability:managed`` indicates that a
repository's vulnerability report reception and disclosure are
handled directly by the OpenStack Vulnerability Management team
(VMT).


Application to current repositories
===================================

.. tagged-projects:: vulnerability:managed


Rationale
=========

The VMT is building out automation and reporting for vulnerability
management processes in order to better accomodate the rapid growth
of the OpenStack ecosystem. In an order to scale consumability of
its processes beyond its current charter and capacity, a formal
acknowledgement of the list of source code repositories directly
handled by the VMT (rather than managed independently by individual
project teams) is best maintained through application of a
governance-related tag.


Requirements
============

1. Since the vulnerability:managed governance tag applies to
   deliverables, all repos within a given deliverable must meet the
   qualifying criteria. This means that if some repos in a
   deliverable are in good enough shape to qualify, their
   vulnerability management could be held back by other repos in the
   same deliverable. It might be argued that perhaps this makes them
   separate deliverables, in which case the governance reference
   documentation should get an update to reflect that first.

2. The deliverable must have a dedicated point of contact for
   security issues (which could be shared by multiple deliverables
   in a given project-team if needed), so that the VMT can engage
   them to triage reports of potential vulnerabilities. Deliverables
   with more than five core reviewers should (so as to limit the
   unnecessary exposure of private reports) settle on a subset of
   these to act as security core reviewers whose responsibility it
   is to be able to confirm whether a bug report is
   accurate/applicable or at least know other subject matter experts
   they can in turn subscribe to perform those activities in a
   timely manner. They should also be able to review and provide
   pre-approval of patches attached to private bugs, which is why at
   least a majority are expected to be core reviewers for the
   deliverable. These should be members of a group contact (for
   example a <something>-coresec team) in the deliverable's defect
   tracker so that the VMT can easily subscribe them to new bugs.

3. The PTL for the deliverable should agree to act as (or delegate)
   a vulnerability management liaison, serving as a point of
   escalation for the VMT in situations where severe or lingering
   vulnerability reports are failing to gain traction toward timely
   and thorough resolution.

4. The defect tracker for the repos within the deliverable should be
   configured to initially only provide access for the VMT to
   privately-reported vulnerabilities. It is the responsibility of
   the VMT to determine whether suspected vulnerabilities are
   reported against the correct deliverable and redirect them when
   possible, since reporters are often unfamiliar with our project
   structure and may choose incorrectly. It implies some loss of
   control for the project team over initial triage of bugs reported
   privately as suspected vulnerabilities, but in some cases helps
   reduce the number of people who have knowledge of them prior to
   public disclosure.

5. The deliverable's repos should undergo a third-party review/audit
   looking for obvious signs of insecure design or risky
   implementation which could imply a large number of future
   vulnerability reports. As much as anything this is a measure to
   keep the VMT's workload down, since it is by necessity a group of
   constrained size and some of its processes simply can't be scaled
   safely. The VMT doesn't stipulate who would actually perform this
   review; for example members of the OpenStack Security
   project-team might volunteer to provide their expertise or some
   other third party may offer assistance.

6. All repos for the deliverable covered should have automated
   testing for important features. Tests need to be feasible for the
   VMT and security reviewers to run locally while evaluating
   patches under embargo, and must also run within the context of
   OpenStack's official continuous integration infrastructure.
   This helps reduce the risk of approved security fixes creating
   new bugs when rushed through public code review at the time of
   disclosure, and also decreases the chance of creating additional
   work for the VMT issuing errata later.


Tag application process
=======================

Anyone may propose adding or removing this tag to a set of
repositories by proposing a change to the openstack/governance
repository. The change is reviewed by the VMT and Technical
Committee and approved using standard resolution approval rules,
including discussion at at least one Technical Committee public IRC
meeting.


Deprecation
===========

The ``vulnerability:managed`` tag should only be removed from
repositories under extreme circumstances, when the VMT is no longer
able to adequately handle these vulnerabilities. Care should be
taken to only discontinue vulnerability management for future
non-patch releases, while continuing to handle vulnerabilities on
already existing ``stable`` release branches if at all possible
until such time as they reach end-of-life.
